---
layout: default     
title: MP1&mdash; Getting Familiar with Text Processing     
category: mps    
permalink: mps/mp1.html    
published: true    
---

This assignment is designed to help you get familiar with basic document representation and analysis techniques. It  consists of two parts totaling 100 points:

* **Part 1: [Vector Space Model](#part1)** *(50 points)*: get the basic idea of text processing, e.g., tokenization, stemming, and normalization, constructing vector space representation for text documents, TF/IDF calculation, and compute similarity among different text documents;
* **Part 2: [Language Models](#part2)** *(50 points)*: get the basic idea of statistic language models, including maximum likelihood estimator, smoothing, generate text from language models, and language model evaluation.

You need to use the CS lab servers to get access to the prepared text documents. Please make sure you have account properly set up on the following three servers before the deadline:

* labunix01.cs.virginia.edu
* labunix02.cs.virginia.edu
* labunix03.cs.virginia.edu

If you encountered any technique difficulty in accessing the above servers, e.g., lose of data, software install requirement, or out of disk space, you should immediately send an email to [root@cs.virginia.edu](root@cs.virginia.edu) for help.

# Data Set

The instructor has prepared a medium size collection of Yelp restaurant reviews (**14,08**3 files for training and **4188** for testing). The data set is located at 

	"/home/hw5x/TextMining/MP1/data/Yelp" 

on the above CS lab servers. All of you should already have the read authorization to this folder.

The files are named and organized in the following manner:

1. Each file contains all the reviews for a specific business on Yelp and is named by its unique ID on yelp, e.g., *FAhx3UZtXvqNiEAd-GNruQ.json*;
2. All the files are in json format. Each json file contains a json array of reviews and a json object about the information of the restaurant. 
	2.1. The json object for **user review** is defined as follows: 
          
		{          
			'Author':'author name (string)',
			'ReviewID':'unique review id (string)',  
			'Overall':'numerical rating of the review (float)',
			'Content':'review text content (string)',   
			'Date':'date when the review was published',   
			'Author_Location':'author's registered location'  
		} 
    
	2.2 The json object for **restaurant info** is defined as follows:

		{                
			'RestaurantID':'unique business id in Yelp (string)',    
			'Name':'name of the business (string)',      
			'Price':'Yelp defined price range (string)',    
			'RestaurantURL':'actual URL to the business page on Yelp (string)',   
			'Longitude':'longitude of the business (double)',              
			'Latitude':'latitude of the business (double)',              
			'Address':'address of the business (string)',       
			'ImgURL':'URL to the business's image on Yelp (string)'     
		} 

**WARNING**: some collected json files did not strictly follow the above json object definition, e.g., some files are missing or empty. As a result, properly handling the exceptions in json parsing is necessary.

# Sample implementation

A sample Java project has been provided along with this assignment for demonstration purpose. It includes sample code for loading JSON files, tokenization in OpenNLP and stemming with Snowball Stemmer. 

It is preferred for you to follow this sample implementation to finish this assignment. It is also allowed to use Python for this assignment, if you are more confident about Python. However, no sample Python implementation will be provided (some sample package usage is provided below for your reference). 
                 
# <a name="preparation"></a>Preparation: Basic Text Processing Techniques

# Terminologies

Before describing the specification of this assignment, two terminologies that will be repeatedly used below have to be first defined:

- **Document**: it refers to each individual Yelp review document. Therefore, one json file will contain multiple review documents.                
- **Restaurant**: it refers to a specific restaurant entity contained in the given review data set. It is uniquely identified by the corresponding ID.            
- **DF/IDF/TF/TTF**: the definitions for those metrics are strictly following those on our lecture slides, unless specifically defined below.


Then, let's go over several important concepts and techniques for basic text analysis.

## Tokenization

Tokenization is the process that one breaks a stream of text into meaningful units. Simple tokenizatoin can be achieved by [regular expressions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression). For example, the follow statement in [Java split](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/String.html#split(java.lang.String)) the input string into tokens:

	"I've practiced for 30 years in pediatrics, and I've never seen anything quite like this.".split("[\\W]+")

In this statement, we define the boundary for a token to be any non-word sequence. And the corresponding output of this statement is,

	*I*, *ve*, *practiced*, *for*, *30*, *years*, *in*, *pediatrics*, *and*, *I*, *ve*, *never*, *seen*, *anything*, *quite*, *like*, *this*
where \*\* indicate the boundary of a token.

A more advanced solution is the statistic machine learning based approaches. And in this assignment, we will learn how to use the tokenizer in [OpenNLP](http://opennlp.apache.org/documentation/1.5.3/manual/opennlp.html#tools.tokenizer) (in Java) and [NLTK](http://nltk.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/api/nltk.tokenize-module.html) (in Python) to perform tokenization.

### 1. Tokenizer in OpenNLP

The detailed documentation for this tokenizer can be found [here](http://opennlp.apache.org/documentation/1.5.3/manual/opennlp.html#tools.tokenizer). You can download the library [here](http://www.dsgnwrld.com/am//opennlp/opennlp-1.5.3/apache-opennlp-1.5.3-src.zip) and the trained model file [here](http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/models-1.5/) (please choose the English tokenizer). 

Once you have properly load the model from file, tokenization can be simply performed by, 

	String tokens[] = tokenizer.tokenize("An input sample sentence.");
     
### 2. Tokenizer in NLTK 
NLTK provides several implementations of [tokenization modules](http://nltk.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/api/nltk.tokenize-module.html), and many of them are actually regular expression based.

The usage of them is the same and very simple,

	>>> import nltk
	>>> tokenizer = nltk.tokenize.treebank.TreebankWordTokenizer()
	>>> tokenizer.tokenize("I've practiced for 30 years in pediatrics, and I've never seen anything quite like this.")
	['I', "'ve", 'practiced', 'for', '30', 'years', 'in', 'pediatrics', ',', 'and', 'I', "'ve", 'never', 'seen', 'anything', 'quite', 'like', 'this', '.']

## Stemming

Stemming is the process for reducing inflected (or sometimes derived) words to their stem, base or root form. For example, "ladies" would be mapped to "ladi" as a result of stemming (although "lady" would be a more desirable result).

### 1. Stemmers in Java
Unfortunately, OpenNLP does not support stemming function currently. There are several existing implementations of stemmer in Java available, including [Snowball Stemmer](http://snowball.tartarus.org/download.php) and [Porter Stemmer](http://tartarus.org/~martin/PorterStemmer/java.txt). The Snowball Stemmer package contains both of these two popularly used stemmers.

The usage of stemmers Snowball package is very simple,

	SnowballStemmer stemmer = new englishStemmer(); // get an instance of SnowballStemmer for English
	stemmer.setCurrent(token); // set the input
	stemmer.stem(); //perform stemming
	String stem = stemmer.getCurrent(); // get the output

### 2. Stemmers in NLTK 
NLTK provides several implementations of [stemming modules](http://nltk.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/doc/api/nltk.stem-module.html), which includes the Porter Stemmer and Snowball Stemmer.

The usage of either stemmer in NLTK is very simple. For example, to use Snowball Stemmer,

	>>> from nltk.stem.snowball import EnglishStemmer # load the stemmer module from NLTK
	>>> stemmer = EnglishStemmer() # get an instance of SnowballStemmer for English
	>>> stemmer.stem('ladies') # call stemmer to stem the input
	u'ladi'

## Stopword removal

In basic text analysis, stopwords are the words which are filtered out before or after processing of natural language text data, based on the assumption that such words do not carry specific semantic meanings. However, there is not one definite list of stopwords which all systems use, and the definition of stopwords are always domain specific. 

Here is a popularly used list of stopwords: [Smart system's stopword list](http://jmlr.org/papers/volume5/lewis04a/a11-smart-stop-list/english.stop). And we will use it as our initial stopword list for this assignment.  

## N-gram

An N-gram is a contiguous sequence of n items from a given sequence of text or speech. For example the bigram (2-gram) representation of the sentence "Text mining is helpful for everyone." would be ["text-mining", "mining-is", "is-helpful", "helpful-for", "for-everyone"].

To generate the N-grams, you simply scan through the list of split tokens and concatenate the consecutive tokens into N-grams. 


# <a name="part1"></a>Part1: Vector Space Model (50pts)      

There are several steps you need to take in this part of assignment.

1. Tokenization: tokenize the review content of each document into tokens.
2. Normalization: normalize the tokens from step 1, by removing individual punctuation marks (here is a list of [English punctuation marks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punctuation_of_English)), converting tokens into lower cases, and recognizing digit numbers, e.g., integers and floats, and map them to a special symbol "NUM". 
3. Stemming: stem the tokens back to their root form. 

Based on these processing steps, all the documents are represented as bag-of-words (i.e., unigrams), and we are ready to get some statistics about this corpus.

### 1.1 Understand Zipf's Law (20pts)

First, let's validate the Zipf's law with the provided Yelp review data set. This can be achieved by following steps:

1. For each token, go over all the review documents (in both *train* and *test* folder) containing it and accumulate its frequency in those documents, i.e., total term frequency.
2. Order the tokens by their total term frequency in a descending order.
3. Create a dot plot by treating each word's order as x-axis and its frequency as y-axis. Please use log-log scale for this plot.

*Hint: basically, you can maintain a look-up table in memory while you are scanning the documents, so that you only need to go through the corpus once to get the counts for all the tokens.*

From the resulting plot, can we find strong linear relationship between the x and y axes in the log-log scale? If so, what is the slope of this linear relationship? To answer these questions, you can dump the data into excel and use the plot function there. (You can also use some scientific computing packages for curve fitting for this purpose.)          

Then change the counting statistics in the previous experiment from *total term frequency* to *document frequency*, perform the experiment again, and draw the corresponding the curve in log-log scale. According to resulting curve and corresponding slope and intercept of the linear interpretation, can you conclude which counting statistics, i.e., *total term frequency* v.s., *document frequency*, fits Zipf's law better on this data set? Can you give any explanation about why one fits the law better?

**What to submit**: 

1. Two curves in log-log space generated above, with the corresponding slopes and intercepts of the linear interpretation results;
2. Your answers and thoughts to the above questions.


### 1.2 Construct a Controlled Vocabulary (10pts)

Generate all the bigrams based on the resulting tokens from the pre-processing step (**only in the train folder**), and mix those bigrams with the unigrams as our initial controlled vocabulary.

Collect the DF statistics for all the N-grams in this initial controlled vocabulary (**only in the train folder**), and find out the top 100 N-grams by DF. Compare this list with our initial stopword list and can you find some restaurant review specific stopwords? Merge those top 100 N-grams into the initial stopword list as our final stopword list.

In the meanwhile, filter the N-grams with DF smaller than 50. All the rest N-grams will be used as our controlled vocabulary.

**What to submit**:

1. List of sample stopwords you found specific to restaurant reviews.
2. The size of the resulting controlled vocabulary.
3. Top 50 and bottom 50 N-grams according to DF in the resulting controlled vocabulary, and their corresponding IDFs (**should be estimated only based on the train folder**).


### 1.3 Compute similarity between documents (20pts)

With the above automatically constructed controlled vocabulary, each review document can be represented as a N-gram vector. Specifically, each dimension in this vector space is defined by the mix of unigrams and bigrams specified by the controlled vocabulary; while the weight for each unigram/bigram in a review document is defined by TF-IDF. Specifically, we will use "**Sub-linear TF scaling**" to compute the normalized TF of each unigram/bigram in a review document. Note the IDF statistics should be **only computed based on the train folder**.

Using this document representation to encode all the review documents in the test folder. Under the folder of "/home/hw5x/TextMining/MP1/data/Yelp", there is a special json file "query.json" manually crafted by the instructor. It contains five carefully selected restaurant reviews from and outside the corpus. Construct the vector space representation for these five reviews (as what you have done for those review documents in the test folder) and find out the most similar reviews to them from the test folder, where the similarity metric is defined as cosine similarity. 

**What to submit**:
1. For each of the query document, list the top 3 most similar review document (including Author, Content and Date) from the test folder and the corresponding cosine similarity.

  